For the last two weeks I have been working on automating bitcoin trades with software. Specifically, I’ve decided to use solely nodejs, and to focus less on the profit-taking scheme of “make a percent or two, divest, and wait a day.”

I had called this approach “medium greed” compared to the “greed is good” approach mentioned in e.g., [Wall Street](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0094291/) that are subsequently near-canonized in investment literature. Instead, I had been thinking on the idea that this software could be given a more nuanced, broader approach 

> “Radical new economic theories are focusing around bandwidth, speed-of-light transmission time, and the implications of CETI, communication with extraterrestrial intelligence. Cosmologists and quants collaborate on bizarre relativistically telescoped financial instruments. Space (which lets you store information) and structure (which lets you process it) acquire value while dumb mass – like gold – loses it. The degenerate cores of the traditional stock markets are in “free fall, the old smokestack microprocessor and biotech/nanotech industries crumbling before the onslaught of matter replicators and self-modifying ideas. The inheritors look set to be a new wave of barbarian communicators, who mortgage their future for a millennium against the chance of a gift from a visiting alien intelligence. Microsoft, once the US Steel of the silicon age, quietly fades into liquidation.”

Excerpt From: Stross, Charles. “Accelerando.” iBooks. https://itunes.apple.com/WebObjects/MZStore.woa/wa/viewBook?id=33C075712F3E29F89C1EB3DE7EC550D2