6 october 2016

I remember a time, not a whole lot of years ago, but a long time ago, when I ran out of hours on a contract in the first half of the month. That is, I'd billed over 163 hours in the first two weeks of the month, and there were no more hours for me on that contract for the month. What, then, was I to do, for the rest of the month? The contract required my work, the team had milestones to hit, my manager expected me to keep working, and I explained this to him in plain language – I cannot work on this, our management has explained that we are not allowed to work on behalf of our customers without explicit billing authorisation, and I am out of hours on this contract.
He looked at me, made a sort of solipsistic face, and said, "there's a subtext here," and spread his hands wide, palms up.
I continued to work on that contract for the rest of that month, around the clock, working 12-14 hour days, in support of a project I didn't like, but which needed doing, and billing "Day Not Worked" on that contract.
This is a story that is not uncommon, and is not anything like the only time this has happened in my career. This is happening to hundreds of thousands of people who are employed in this kind of work.
People are employed in jobs which are described as high-paying (and are, some of the time) and comfortable (and are, some of the time), but we do not often talk about the grave cost to many of these employees personally in terms of things like mental health (I have never, ever, in my entire career, worked in a software engineering team that didn't at some time or other run its team super, super hard, where this is described as hours in excess of, say, seventy hours a week and this being necessary to achieve some goal that may not even be real).
The fact also is that not all these jobs are equally compensated. We joke about Silicon Valley jobs being "day care" and everyone getting free vegan meals and this or that, but the reality is we cannot even determine who is being paid fairly. We cannot ensure that all people – people of colour, people of all gender variants – are being included.
This is because we do not have any kind of representation.
This is called a "union."
I am not the first person to suggest this, but I want to gently suggest this again. If you are a person who works in an open office, and you find this a little, I don't know, maybe it feels a little creepy. Or you were a little unnerved when your company went to "hoteling" to save costs (where did that money go? did you get a raise?). If there isn't anywhere for you to quietly work. If you have no way to actually work a 40-hour week, despite the fact you are being paid a 40-hour paycheck because you will be stack-ranked against employees who are working 65-90 hours a week /because they will be fired if they do not/, and that feels unjust, maybe you should think pretty hard about this.
Collective bargaining, organising, getting people together is a good way to end this.
I think one of the things that has really been bothering people about the suggestion that programmers, designers, sysops, and the like organise and unionise is this idea that we are all "creative professionals" or that we are above it. The fact of the matter is that we are not. We are all *worth* *it*. Without a voice, without representation, we are losing everything, and we are letting small groups of people take advantage of us in ways that are terrible and disempowering.
The other thing I think that has been holding people back from a union is this idea that we are all different. I will tell you that we are far more similar than we are different. An organisation of engineers with collective bargaining would be amazingly empowering for every discipline in engineering and would do amazing things for everyone working in engineering today.
I really encourage you, if you are an engineer working in software, to talk to someone who is an employee of a union. Ask them candidly about their experience with a union. Talk to your friends.
