25 may 2016

Let me ask a question for which I think there is no definitive answer, but serves a purpose for me:
Is complaining useful?
I encounter complaining continually in my professional and personal life. What surprises me is the response I get when I provide people a solution to their complaints.
You see, many of the things that people complain about there are answers and solutions for. They are not always easy; sometimes they require introspection, or holding oneself to a standard that may seem unattainable. Other times, there are easier solutions. But the answer is almost never zero-effort. When I present the complainant with the answer, saying, “well, if you would but go talk to Ralph on the 8th floor, and explain that you don’t like such-and-such,” quickly the situation becomes clear: complaining is not actually ever about fixing anything. Or, it seldom is ever about fixing anything.
For me, when I find that I am unhappy, my productivity goes down the toilet. I can’t sleep. I’m utterly miserable and I want nothing more than to fix. the. thing. that. is. making. me. unhappy. I’m probably not very fun to be around. So when I have something to complain about, generally, I try to find the source of the unhappiness, find a way to articulate the problem – yes, in the form of a complaint, but I am also working on the delivery of that message such that this is a constructive conversation – and then I work with whomever or whatever process is the origin of that problem to fix it. If it’s a machine, process, robot, or PG&E, etcetera, I do what I can to *avoid* that process and remove it from my life entirely, because complaining doesn’t do me any good, and the robot isn’t listening.
So I am going to try and commit to something here.
If I am complaining to you directly (that is, you are not part of a Facebook conversation, this is a one-to-one conversation) about something, and you are not the source of the problem, you can probably assume that I need some kind of support that is more along the lines of emotional, rather than technical, practical, support. I am not asking you for your assistance; I simply need somebody to listen to me. However, if I am complaining to you about something, the chances are very good that I am very earnestly trying to fix something. If you are incapable of either listening or fixing the problem with me, stop me early, and tell me this, and I will find the right person. I have no interest in wasting your time or mine complaining without action or effect.
Because I am wholly committed to making things better.
There is no point at all in identifying problems in our personal or professional lives, in our broader social circles, in society at large, and simply pointing a finger, and saying “that, there, that is a problem which is unsolvable.” Because there are no unsolvable problems. Rather, there are problems we have yet to solve.
Let’s do things better. Together.
