11 october 2016

CN: workplace trauma, self-harm
I had a conversation tonight with an engineer I like a whole lot about how workplaces for engineers (I use this term here to describe people who work in technical positions to include VFX people, datacenter technicians, NOC workers, the people that power this enormous and booming segment of our economy) fail to provide workplaces that are, at a basic level, safe.
I have written here earlier about the basic failure in the workplace of workers to organise and the lack of collective bargaining, but the other thing that came up tonight in our discussion was the failure of leadership.
Leadership is a very difficult thing to measure. It is one of these Potter-Stewart kind of things that you know when you see, and many people do not have the good grace to know when they are bad at it. Furthermore, a good manager is not always a good leader, and vice-versa. Sometimes a good manager is a good leader (this is rare, but happens).
But in a company, especially as the size of a company grows, the chances of bad leaders, and Really Bad leaders to get involved increases. Actual sociopaths can be elevated to positions of leadership (and in fact will seek these positions out and they are well-suited to it from the perspective of management).
The human consequences of this are devastating.
I spoke to this engineer about a suicide they had heard of in the workplace, and how it had affected them. I have now been around for a couple decades and change; I have seen a few suicides in my time as an engineer. I have seen more attempts than I can count. And I believe that all of these are due to not the weakness of the people suffering, but rather to the fact that the positions these people are put into are untenable.
This is not the way things need to be.
I have time and again watched people talk about an under-performing employee – for literally decades now – and make elaborate plans about how they can set about firing that employee. How they can concoct reasons to get that person out the door. This is done in the most callous way you can imagine.
We forget our humanity sometimes. We forget that when we have a milestone in a word document or a spreadsheet, that it is eight words in a spreadsheet and that is actually a vague concept compared to that person who has to go home tonight without a job.
Under-performing employees sharpen us, as leaders, as managers, and in fact as other individual contributors. They force us to learn how to help them become better contributors to the team. They force us to become better teachers. They force us to learn more about our own leadership, and how to mentor. Because we are failing them.
Before terminating a person, we should undertake every conceivable effort to see if they would be more productive and happier elsewhere in our own organisation. We should also check our own biases; many times this employee may not be getting along with us personally, or on our own team, and the dynamic itself may not fit. Because, again, we may be failing them. Good leaders realise this. Bad leaders will instead look at this situation, become angry, or obsessed with this pebble in their sandal, and want this person out – damn the consequences to that person's life, to the company, and so on.
But these are human beings. Forgetting that engineers are human, that we are all human beings, denigrates all of us, makes us less than what we aspire to be when we build things as engineers – when we build great things.
Great leaders know that they are human, and the people they lead are human, and they treat them well. Your directs, and their directs, aren't resources. They have homes, and families, and lovers, and friends, and they need to go to those places, and see those people.
Without doing that, you have what we see in our field today: a plague of actual suicides; a hand-wringing about stigmatised mental health and what to do about it.
I am fond of saying "managers manage." I wish it were as simple as saying also, "leaders lead." The problem is there are so many people who seem quite ready to "lead," by simply assuming it means "do everything on the to-do list until everyone collapses."
Leadership takes equal parts empathy, wisdom, and compassion.
